# GCDCourseProject
Course Project for Coursera/Johns Hopkins Getting and Cleaning Data course
---
title: "README"
author: "clutterstack"
date: "October 25, 2015"
output: html_document
---
This is a course project for the Coursera/Johns Hopkins course "Getting and Cleaning Data". It contains a script, **run_analysis.R**, which performs an analysis on data from a UCI study of accelerometer and gyroscope data from Samsung smartphones. Further information on the experiment and data is at <http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones>.

# Files in this repository:

* ```run_analysis.R``` - a script to take data from 

* ```CodeBook.md``` - information about the original data, the processing performed by the script, and the output data generated by it.

* ```README.md``` (this file)

# Using **run_analysis.R**

Obtain raw input data from
<https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip>.

Be sure that the script **run_analysis.R** is present in the same directory as the unzipped data; that is, the same directory as the data files **features.txt** and **activity\_labels.txt**, and the directories **test/** and **train/**.

# Function of **run_analysis.R**

This script does the following, as described in the assignment page:

> 1. Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set.
>
> 2. Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement. 
>
> 3. Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set
>
> 4. Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names. 
>
> 5. From the data set in step 4, creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity  and each subject.

# Reading the output data

The output file **UCImeans.txt**, generated by the R script **run_analysis.R**, and read by R using ```read.table("UCImeans.txt", header = TRUE)```, contains the calculated means of each of the mean and standard deviation variables for each unique participant/activity combination.
